# PD-Bird_Curlew_Behavior
4th chapter of my dissertation.

Study Species: Long-billed Curlews are migratory shorebirds that breed on the Northern Great Plains and build their nests on the open ground among short-stature vegetation, where they are exposed to high levels of predation risk (Allen, 1980; Dugger & Dugger, 2020). Curlews have three main nest defense behaviors: alarm calls, dive-bombing, and cryptic posture (Allen, 1980). Incubating curlews perform cryptic posture in response to potential predators. In cryptic posture, incubating curlews hunker down on the nest, lowering their bodies and heads to lie flat against the ground (Allen, 1980). This causes curlews to become extremely well-concealed, even at extremely close distances (Allen, 1980, RAD & AJB pers. obs.). Non-incubating curlews give alarm calls and dive-bombs typical of mobbing responses in many bird species (Allen, 1980). Long-billed Curlews are ecologically associated with Black-tailed Prairie Dogs: they frequently forage on prairie dog towns, nest near or on them, and raise their broods on prairie dog towns after the chicks have left the nest (Sharps & Uresk, 1990; Smith & Lomolino, 2004). This relationship is further supported by traditional ecological knowledge held by the Aaniiih and Nakoda Nations, which describes curlews as preferring to nest near the edges of prairie dog towns (Dennis Longknife, pers. comm.)
 
Study Design: During May and June of 2023 - 2024, we conducted paired behavioral experiments using a simulated predator to evaluate whether the presence of prairie dog alarm calls changed Long-billed Curlew nest defense behavior. The simulated predator consisted of a taxidermied American Badger (Taxidea taxus) mounted to a Radio-Controlled car, hereafter “Badger-inator” (specify model/link to construction details). We selected this species because American Badgers are frequent predators of both Black-tailed Prairie Dogs and nests of Long-billed Curlews (Allen, 1980). While primarily nocturnal, American Badgers are often diurnal, particularly in rural areas with low human population densities like our study sites (cite camera trap data). We often observed American Badgers in the morning at study sites, usually on prairie dog towns (RAD & AJB, pers. obs).

Although curlews build nests both on and off prairie dog towns, we only conducted trials at curlew nests away from active prairie dog towns such that experimental calls were the only prairie dog vocalizations the nesting birds heard. We chose this approach because prairie dogs called at us even when we were concealed in a blind or a vehicle, so it was not possible for us to achieve an effective control trial at curlew nests on prairie dog towns. Our paired behavior trials consisted of a “treatment” where nesting curlews were exposed to audio playback of prairie dog alarm calls combined with the Badger-inator and a “control” where nesting curlews were exposed to the Badger-inator without playback of prairie dog alarm calls. This study design provided a simple way to compare the nest defense behaviors of curlews with and without prairie dog alarm calls to evaluate potential for heterospecific eavesdropping and subsequent changes to nest defense behavior in this system.

Because curlew nest defense behaviors may increase as incubation progresses, due to greater reproductive investment, we conducted trials during the middle of the incubation period for curlews (days 4 - 12), avoiding days close to clutch completion and hatch(Ghalambor and Martin 2001). Paired trials were conducted at least 48 hours apart to reduce disturbance to curlews and ensure independence between trials. 
